Progress Report 2023 Q2 (#181)
citra-emu/citra-web: site/content/entry/citra-progress-report-2023-q2/index.md

### Generate universal macOS build ([#6240](https://github.com/citra-emu/citra/pull/6240), [#6321](https://github.com/citra-emu/citra/pull/6321)) by [Steveice10](https://github.com/Steveice10)

Somewhat recently, Apple released a new processor for their devices utilizing the ARM architecture, named Apple silicon (M1/M2). Citra’s x86_64 macOS builds technically worked with these new devices through Rosetta 2, in the sense that your game would launch, but it would also result in game bugs; freezing and crashing pretty frequently.
Building it natively for ARM was often a solution, a solution inaccessible to the average user, unfortunately. An official Citra build was needed for users running those Apple silicon devices.

However, as you may be aware, Apple does not support OpenGL 4.3, which is what Citra uses now. This presented us with a lot more issues. How are we going to get Apple silicon devices to run on Citra when macOS isn’t even a supported platform? 

> Banking off of the fact that we have a new Vulkan graphics backend quickly making its way into Citra (have we mentioned that yet?), Steveice10 got to work implementing a universal macOS build for Citra that covers both x86_64 and arm64. 

Reviewer: This paragraph starts with saying Apple not supporting OpenGL. Then it talks about Vulkan.. but that isn't supported by Apple either.

Somewhere else you mention MoltenVK *once* without explaining what it is at all.

NIM stands for Network Installation Manager, and is a 3DS system module that handles title installations from the CDN. This in turn creates a bunch of services, of which nim:u is the so-called “updater service”. This is used, for example, for the system updates in the 3DS system settings.
Without this service properly implemented, Citra would exhibit strange glitches, such as instability around app icons on the HOME Menu, or random downloading of present icons with garbled titles.

Citra did, in fact, have a portion of this module semi-implemented in the past, but it wasn’t exactly put to good use. Back in 2017, Citra developer Subv added the [CheckForSysUpdateEvent syscall](https://github.com/citra-emu/citra/pull/2974), which allowed the HOME Menu to boot.
However, doing anything other than just looking at the pretty background would softlock the emulator. One of the caveats of this addition was that the LLE NIM applet, used for handling title installations as mentioned above, needed to be enabled from the debugging menu, which wasn’t very user-friendly or obvious.

> {{< figure src="lle.png"

Reviewer 2: i don't know if this picture is really needed here.

    title="" >}}
	

> To address this issue, Steveice10 implemented full stubs for the nim:u service based on their own reverse engineering work of the 3DS. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To address this issue, Steveice10 implemented stubs for the nim:u service based on their own reverse engineering work of the 3DS. 
```
full stubs is an oxymoron :p

Reviewer 3: “Full” here is meant to mean the whole service has resonable stubs rather than the stubs themselves being “full” in some way, but I agree the word can be left out if it’s confusing.

The ns:c service was introduced with firmware version 5.0.0-11, and appears to be used only by the Instruction Manual applet for triggering SD/Game Card removal errors when ejecting the media that the manual is stored on.
By implementing a stub for the aforementioned service, the instruction manual now works on Citra!

{{< figure src="manual.png"
    title="Very important for preservation of the 3DS." >}}
	
Another corner of the HOME Menu that never quite worked was the Internet Browser applet, which would mysteriously cause the execution to break, alongside a healthy dose of memory errors.

```
[  19.448994] Debug.Emulated <Critical> core/hle/kernel/svc.cpp:Break:1120: Emulated program broke execution!
[  19.448994] Debug.Emulated <Critical> core/hle/kernel/svc.cpp:Break:1136: Break reason: PANIC
[  19.449124] HW.Memory <Error> core/memory.cpp:Read:469: unmapped Read32 @ 0x000000FC at PC 0x00278C18
[  19.449277] HW.Memory <Error> core/memory.cpp:Read:469: unmapped Read32 @ 0x000000A0 at PC 0x0028117C
[  19.449282] HW.Memory <Error> core/memory.cpp:Read:469: unmapped Read32 @ 0x000000C8 at PC 0x0028117C
```

> These errors occur because Citra’s code for loading CROs (relocatable code, similar to DLLs on Windows) did not allow parts of the internet browser’s code to be mapped into memory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These errors occured because Citra’s code for loading CROs (relocatable code, similar to DLLs on Windows) did not allow parts of the internet browser’s code to be mapped into memory.
```

The problem stemmed from the repeated invocation of `CheckAuthorization`, a function that checks camera permissions with macOS each time `StartCapture` is called. This approach was far from ideal, so this change optimizes the process by calling `CheckAuthorization` only once, before the media capture starts.
This ensures that the camera will resume again after the emulation is paused, resulting in features such as QR code scanning to work as intended.

### Fix global settings being inaccessible on macOS ([#6235](https://github.com/citra-emu/citra/pull/6235)) by [Steveice10](https://github.com/Steveice10)

As we mentioned earlier on, we recently added per-game settings to Citra! However, in the beginning, they also broke the global settings! This was a big deal, as the main way to configure your Citra instance was now lost.
Fortunately, the fix was relatively simple; manually specifying the roles for the key menu actions such as About and Preferences instead of relying on the default Qt heuristics. With this, the global settings are once again accessible!

> ## Generate universal macOS build ([#6240](https://github.com/citra-emu/citra/pull/6240), [#6321](https://github.com/citra-emu/citra/pull/6321)) by [Steveice10](https://github.com/Steveice10)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Generate universal macOS build ([#6240](https://github.com/citra-emu/citra/pull/6240), [#6321](https://github.com/citra-emu/citra/pull/6321)) by [Steveice10](https://github.com/Steveice10)
```

Reviewer 2: It seems like our subheadings have inconsistent sizes in other places as well

One might say, "That's easy then! Why not just revert the PR that caused it?"

Well the change in question is actually quite desirable: it removes fully invalid textures from the cache, in order to speed up lookups and performance. It was briefly mentioned in our [previous progress report](https://citra-emu.org/entry/citra-progress-report-2023-q1/), go read it if you haven’t already!

{{< figure src="mmbroke.png"
    title="Did someone turn off the lights?" >}}

Another thing to consider is the hashing algorithm being used to identify the textures. Up until this point Citra used the deswizzled and decoded texture data as it was the most convenient option at the time. Said approach presents issues though when other graphics APIs enter the picture, namely Vulkan. As a low-level API, Vulkan accurately reports the host GPUs capabilities, meaning that certain formats Citra expects might not be natively supported, requiring conversions to work. Such conversions break the previously trusted hashing, which could lead to missing textures.

> With the hopes of fixing the aforementioned issues, GPUCode embarked on a journey of fully rewriting the custom textures implementation. The result is a greatly improved system with a bunch of cool new features, like support for compressed formats like BC7/BC5/ASTC and their container file formats DDS/KTX. By using  these formats, the size of a texture pack can be decreased significantly while also maintaining decent image quality. Note that the BCn formats are unsupported on Android devices. So, if a creator wants to target mobile, we recommend either sticking to png, or having an alternative ASTC version of the pack.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
With the hopes of fixing the aforementioned issues, GPUCode embarked on a journey of fully rewriting the custom textures implementation. The result is a greatly improved system with a bunch of cool new features, like support for compressed formats such as BC7/BC5/ASTC and their container file formats DDS/KTX. By using these formats, the size of a texture pack can be decreased significantly while also maintaining decent image quality. Note that the BCn formats are unsupported on Android devices. So, if a creator wants to target mobile, we recommend either sticking to png, or having an alternative ASTC version of the pack.
```

{{< mp4 src="brickwall.mp4" >}}

### Textures loading screen ([#6478](https://github.com/citra-emu/citra/pull/6478)) by [luc-git](https://github.com/luc-git)

Using preloaded custom textures is usually quite taxing on the system RAM, especially if you don’t have much to begin with. Loading can be very slow and, at times, even freeze your entire PC! 

By adding a loading screen, you can now track the progression of your preloaded custom textures as your game boots. It also works as an indicator to let your PC know that the app has not frozen, and to not enter it into a “not responding” state. Additionally, this solves the issue of Citra’s inability to be stopped whilst preloading custom textures, which is handy if you need to stop it for any reason whatsoever.

## Add MMPX texture filter ([#6564](https://github.com/citra-emu/citra/pull/6564)) by [stuken](https://github.com/stuken)

> What's better than 5 texture filters? Well, what about 6! Introducing the MMPX texture filter, implemented by first time contributor, [stuken](https://github.com/stuken).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
What's better than 5 texture filters? Well, how about 6! Introducing the MMPX texture filter, implemented by first time contributor, [stuken](https://github.com/stuken).
```

MMPX is a texture filter centered around the preservation of those classic pixel art styles we typically see in 8- and 16-bit era video games. Sprites, fonts, you name it, it’s been given a sweet pixel art style with this new texture filter!

This new texture filter can be enabled in `Emulation -> Configure -> Graphics -> Renderer` (`Citra -> Preferences` on macOS).

{{< juxtapose id="e103936e-1122-11ee-b5bd-6595d9b17862" >}}

# Audio

## Implement OpenAL backend ([#6450](https://github.com/citra-emu/citra/pull/6450)) by [Steveice10](https://github.com/Steveice10)

> OpenAL, or in Citra's case a variant of OpenAL, OpenAL Soft, is an audio API designed for efficient rendering of multichannel three-dimensional positional audio. Basically, this API adds realism back to game audio by simulating different audio effects.

Reviewer 2: I would not talk about these audio affects at all if we don't even use them

In Citra, however, we do not use this for positional audio. It is there just in case Cubeb, our default audio backend, fails for any reason. To get this working in Citra, though, a few things had to be changed first.

Before this PR, the input audio settings UI assumed that only the Cubeb backend would be used, and, unlike output, did not have a proper selector for other options. The input UI was edited to allow “Real Device (OpenAL)” to be selected, along with “Real Device (Cubeb)” as before. 
By changing these UI options, along with internal code cleanup to make managing output and input devices more consistent, we can improve Citra’s portability as a whole. We also use OpenAL Soft, as it supports iOS, while Cubeb does not.

### Implement Apple AudioToolbox AAC decoder ([#6510](https://github.com/citra-emu/citra/pull/6510)) by [Steveice10](https://github.com/Steveice10)

> Apple devices, like Macs and iPhones, use a framework called AudioToolbox to provide interfaces for recording, playback, and stream parsing. This framework can be used to encode and decode different audio formats, such as AAC

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Apple devices, like Macs and iPhones, use a framework called AudioToolbox to provide interfaces for recording, playback, and stream parsing. This framework can be used to encode and decode different audio formats, such as AAC.
```

AAC audio might be something you’re already familiar with in Citra. It was a big reason as to why Pokémon X and Y couldn’t be played properly for many many years. But thankfully, that hasn’t been an issue for a while now!

By implementing an AAC decoder backend using the AudioToolbox library, we are able to eliminate the FFmpeg dependency on macOS. And, yes, Pokémon X and Y still work on macOS with this change.

### Dynamically load fdk-aac and FFmpeg at runtime ([#6570](https://github.com/citra-emu/citra/pull/6570)) by [Steveice10](https://github.com/Steveice10)

This PR allows Citra to dynamically load the fdk-aac and FFmpeg libraries. These are difficult to distribute due to licensing reasons, but necessary to support features like AAC audio on Linux.

This also allows for the Linux AppImages (Yeah, we have those now. More on those later!) to use AAC decoding, so long as the required libraries are already installed on the system. As mentioned just above, Pokémon X and Y rely on AAC audio for the game to have any audio in the first place, and now this works on the AppImages too!

> However, this change also has an implication for those who use the built-in video dumper. To use the video dumper, you’ll now have to install FFmpeg yourself, from either their official website or via your package manager of choice

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
However, this change also has an implication for those who use the built-in video dumper. To use the video dumper, you’ll now have to install FFmpeg yourself, from either their official website or via your package manager of choice.
```

As you may or may not know, an important feature of the 3DS is the Virtual Console. This allows people to play a variety of titles from different consoles throughout Nintendo’s history, such as the NES and Game Boy, right on their 3DS.

Sadly, we have a lot of issues with these in Citra. One such issue is that the Game Boy Advance Virtual Console just crashes whenever you’re trying to load a game, because the ExeFS code binary is a GBA ROM. 
This PR adds a simple popup to explain to the user that GBA Virtual Console ROMs are currently unsupported in Citra. Clarity is always key, of course!

### Extra additions to per-game settings ([#6308](https://github.com/citra-emu/citra/pull/6308), [#6379](https://github.com/citra-emu/citra/pull/6379)) by [GPUCode](https://github.com/GPUCode) and [luc-git](https://github.com/luc-git)

Recently added to Citra, the per-game settings bring a new way to configure the settings of Citra on a game-by-game basis. However, not all settings were added with this in one go, as we were unsure which settings most users would find relevant to have here.

> After hearing your feedback, we decided to add most of the graphical enhancement options to the per-game settings. This includes features such as the resolution upscaling, custom textures, texture filters and the options for the screen layout. This way, you have many more ways to customize your games to your heart's desires, without having to change settings around for each individual game! 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
After hearing your feedback, we decided to add most of the graphical enhancement options to the per-game settings. This includes features such as the resolution upscaling, custom textures, texture filters, and the options for the screen layout. This way, you have many more ways to customize your games to your heart's content, without having to change the global settings around every time you swap games! 
```

On top of this, we also moved the cheats section to the per-game settings instead of being in the global settings. By being available in the per-game settings, cheats are able to be managed more easily for each game they are for, and are now configurable when a game is not running. 

{{< figure src="cheats.png"
    title="Look, Ma! New settings!" >}}

## Add consolidated GodMode9 key dumping script ([#6396](https://github.com/citra-emu/citra/pull/6396)) by [Steveice10](https://github.com/Steveice10)

Something a bit different here… we’ve made our own GodMode9 dumping script!

> If you’re somehow unaware, GodMode9 is a homebrew full access file browser for the 3DS, allowing you access to pretty much everything on the console. This app is vital for playing games on Citra, as you must use this to dump your games, updates, DLC and anything else you may want from your 3DS. GodMode9 can utilize dumping scripts to easily dump a bunch of things at once that the user may want, such as how the infamous ThreeSD works.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If you’re somehow unaware, GodMode9 is a homebrew full-access file browser for the 3DS, allowing you access to pretty much everything on the console. This app is vital for playing games in Citra, as you must use this to dump your games, updates, DLC, and anything else you may want from your 3DS. GodMode9 can utilize dumping scripts to easily dump a bunch of things at once that the user may want, such as how ThreeSD works.
```

> This script is used to dump all the keys needed for Citra into one file, which simplifies things a lot. In the past, you would have to dump many different files such as `Boot9`, `Sector0x96` and `NATIVE_FIRM` just to get encrypted games running on Citra.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This script is used to dump all the keys needed for Citra into one file, which simplifies things a lot. In the past, you would have to dump many different files such as `Boot9`, `Sector0x96`, and `NATIVE_FIRM` just to get encrypted games running on Citra.
```

> Now with the new system file download option through the Nintendo Update Service (NUS) in Citra, which relies on encryption keys in order to be used, it is best time to find a way to streamline this dumping process for once and for all.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Now, with the new system file download option through the Nintendo Update Service (NUS) in Citra, which relies on encryption keys in order to be used, it was a good time to find a way to streamline this dumping process once and for all.
```

This was first requested back in 2017, with mixed opinions from both the community and developers. On one hand, people were excited to possibly see an easier way to use Citra on Linux. But on the other hand, the developers were concerned that Citra was not in a state where this could be used back then.
Nowadays, Citra’s development has come a long way to where an AppImage is a feasible way of shipping Citra to all of our Linux users. As AppImage’s are supported by many different distributions, such as Ubuntu and Fedora, you now have a new way to use Citra on whatever distro you’re on alongside our Flatpak releases. 

### Add warning popup when loading save states for the first time ([#6565](https://github.com/citra-emu/citra/pull/6565)) by [GPUCode](https://github.com/GPUCode)

Carrying on with the theme of common errors from users… broken save states…
Pretty much every Citra user has seen this at some point. You save your game using save states, update Citra and… what? My save is now broken? How did this happen?

> To give a short summary of what happens, save states don’t just save your game, they save the entire state of Citra. Kinda in the name there. When an update to Citra that changes the state happens, the previous save states become invalid. This is why it is so important that you do not rely on save states to save your game progression and that you always save in-game.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To give a short summary of what happens, save states don’t just save your game, they save the entire state of Citra. Kinda in the name there. When an update is pushed to Citra that changes the state, the previous save states become invalid. This is why it is so important that you do not rely on save states to save your game progression and that you frequently save in-game.
```

> Unfortunately, many people do not realize this. Which causes a lot of distress at lost progression and a lot of frustration fiddling around with older builds to get the saves working again. Simple solution? Warn the people of what might happen when using save states. At least that will help people to not lose their progress… right…?

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Unfortunately, many people do not realize this. Which causes a lot of distress at lost progression and a lot of frustration fiddling around with older builds to get the saves working again. Simple solution? Warn the people of what might happen when using save states. At the very least, this might help people to not lose their progress.
```

{{< figure src="savestate.png"
    title="Don't skip this, it's important!" >}}

## yuzu ports by [Morph1984](https://github.com/Morph1984) and [FearlessTobi](https://github.com/FearlessTobi)

### Enable High DPI fixes for Qt >= 5.14 ([#6262](https://github.com/citra-emu/citra/pull/6262)) originally by [Morph1984](https://github.com/Morph1984)

> On higher DPI monitors, any information window, such as the game compatibility reporting tool, would be scaled incorrectly, resulting in massive text size that could not be read due to it cutting off.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
On higher DPI monitors, any information window, such as the game compatibility reporting tool, would be scaled incorrectly, resulting in massive text size that could not be read due to it getting cut off.
```

By utilizing Qt’s new high DPI application attributes for scaling a window, paired with a heuristic to select an integer scale value dependent on the current screen resolution, the scaling issue that has plagued Citra for four and a half years is finally resolved!

### Port multiplayer related PRs from yuzu ([#6319](https://github.com/citra-emu/citra/pull/6319)) originally by [SoRadGaming](https://github.com/SoRadGaming) and [unfamiliarplace](https://github.com/unfamiliarplace)

> Just a few multiplayer additions here for ease when playing multiplayer on Citra with your friends!

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Just a few multiplayer additions here for ease when playing multiplayer in Citra with your friends!
```

> First off, we have support for hostnames and IPv6 when using Direct Connect! Direct Connect is used to, well, directly connect to someone without having to search through the multiplayer lobby, or if they’re hosting unlisted! In the past, the only way to connect to an unlisted room was via an IP address.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
First off, we have support for hostnames and IPv6 when using Direct Connect! Direct Connect is used to, well, directly connect to someone without having to search through the multiplayer lobby or if they’re hosting unlisted! In the past, the only way to connect to an unlisted room was via an IP address.
```

> This isn’t ideal, as it requires knowing the exact IP address to type in to connect. With this change, it allows for Citra to use a domain address, as well as IPv6, as an input method to connect to a multiplayer server.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This wasn't ideal, as it requires knowing the exact IP address in order to connect. With this change, it allows for Citra to use a domain address, as well as IPv6, as an input method to connect to a multiplayer server.
```

> And then we have something to clean up the multiplayer lobby a little bit more, a toggle to hide empty rooms! Sick of shifting through each room manually to see if there is anyone to play with? Fret not, with a simple click of this button and you will be shown rooms that have at least one other person in to play with!

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
And then we have an option to tidy up the multiplayer lobby a bit more, a toggle to hide empty rooms! Sick of shifting through each room manually to see if there is anyone to play with? Fret not, with a simple click of this button, you will be shown rooms that have at least one other person to play with!
```

Both of these additions help make the multiplayer experience in Citra just that little bit better and allow you to enjoy playing with ease, which we all love.

# Conclusion

> Well, that’s a wrap! It has been an incredible couple of months for Citra development. We are definitely picking up speed, the likes of which we have not seen here for years, and as promised, the reports are continuing.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Well, that’s a wrap! It has been an incredible couple of months for Citra development. We are definitely picking up speed, the likes of which we have not seen here for years, and as promised, the progress reports are continuing.
```

> A massive thanks goes out to the Citra community, especially the developers. None of this shown here would have been possible without all of the people involved here keeping this emulator afloat. These reports give us the opportunity to showcase the talented people working on this project, so you best believe they’re going to be long!

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A massive thanks goes out to the Citra community, especially the developers. None of these achievements would have been possible without all of the people involved here keeping this emulator afloat. These reports give us the opportunity to showcase the talented people working on this project, so you best believe they’re going to be long!
```

If you want to support this project, we have a [Patreon](https://www.patreon.com/citraemu)! Donations to the Patreon go directly to our team to assist with obtaining hardware for testing and keeping our servers up and running. Donations are not required, but are greatly appreciated!

If you are looking to contribute to Citra or just want to get involved with our community, you can find us on our [Discord server](https://discord.com/invite/FAXfZV9) or on our IRC channel (#citra @ [Libera.Chat](https://libera.chat/)). 

> To those of you who made it until the end, thanks for reading! We have many more exciting things to tell you all about in the future, so stay tuned!

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To those of you who made it to the end, thanks for reading! We have many more exciting things to tell you all about in the future, so stay tuned!
```

### Add MMPX texture filter ([#6564](https://github.com/citra-emu/citra/pull/6564)) by [stuken](https://github.com/stuken)

What's better than 5 texture filters? Well, how about 6! Introducing the MMPX texture filter, implemented by first time contributor, [stuken](https://github.com/stuken).
MMPX is a texture filter centered around the preservation of those classic pixel art styles we typically see in 8- and 16-bit era video games. Sprites, fonts, you name it, it’s been given a sweet pixel art style with this new texture filter!

This new texture filter can be enabled in `Emulation -> Configure -> Graphics -> Renderer` (`Citra -> Preferences` on macOS).

{{< single-title-imgs-compare
    ""
    "./none.png"
    "./mmpx.png"

>     >}} 

Reviewer 4: Is there a reason a caption was withheld? Are captions broken for the juxtapose shortcode on Citra?

Reviewer 2: There were some problems, but we fixed them yesterday. It just needs to be pushed to this branch.
Also the image size needs to be decreased.

Author: Just had a few issues when moving over to the new system, but all fixed now and captions can be added 👍
